Vincent Van Gogh

Birth Year : 1853 Death Year : 1890 Country : Netherlands 
 
Vincent van Gogh, the eldest son of a Dutch Reformed minister and a bookseller's 
daughter, pursued various vocations, including that of an art dealer and clergyman, 
before deciding to become an artist at the age of twenty-seven. Over the course of 
his decade-long career (1880–90), he produced nearly 900 paintings and more than 
1,100 works on paper. Ironically, in 1890, he modestly assessed his artistic 
legacy as "of very secondary importance." 

Largely self-taught, Van Gogh gained his footing as an artist by zealously 
copying prints and studying nineteenth-century drawing manuals and lesson books, 
such as Charles Bargue's Exercises au fusain and cours de dessin. He felt that it 
was necessary to master black and white before working with color, and first 
concentrated on learning the rudiments of figure drawing and rendering landscapes 
in correct perspective. In 1882, he moved from his parents' home in Etten to the 
Hague, where he received some formal instruction from his cousin, Anton Mauve, a 
leading Hague School artist. That same year, he executed his first independent 
works in watercolor and ventured into oil painting; he also enjoyed his first 
earnings as an artist: his uncle, the art dealer C. M. Van Gogh, commissioned 
two sets of drawings of Hague townscapes for which Van Gogh chose to depict such 
everyday sites as views of the railway station, gasworks, and nursery gardens. 
 
Other Links related to this Artist:

List of Major Works of Vincent Van Gogh -- 
http://www.intofineart.com/oil%20painting%20artist/Vincent%20Van%20Gogh.html 

Vincent Van Gogh Biography -- 
http://www.vangoghgallery.com/misc/bio.html 
Painting Gallery - http://www.vangoghgallery.com/catalog/painting/
 
Major Works:

1. Cafe terrace at the Place you forum in Arles in night - Cafe Terrace at Night 1888 - Oil on Canvas, 81 x 65.5cm - 31 x 26 Inches approx). 
Vincent van Gogh painted several night scenes and became fascinated with depicting the stars most famously with his 
Starry Night paintings) and the light effects of the night. Van Gogh has achieved an effect of luminosity with the use 
of contrasting colors and tones. The darks compliment the lights, the blues intensify the oranges, and the purples bring 
out the yellows. Van Gogh wrote about the Cafe Terrace at Night painting in a letter to his sister, saying "Here you have 
a night painting without black, with nothing but beautiful blue and violet and green and in this surrounding the 
illuminated area colors itself sulfur pale yellow and citron green. It amuses me enormously to paint the night right 
on the spot. Normally, one draws and paints the painting during the daytime after the sketch. But I like to paint the 
thing immediately. It is true that in the darkness I can take a blue for a green, a blue lilac for a pink lilac, since 
it is hard to distinguish the quality of the tone. But it is the only way to get away from our conventional night with 
poor pale whitish light, while even a simple candle already provides us with the richest of yellows and oranges." The cafe 
still exists today and is a popular destination for those following the footsteps of Vincent van Gogh.

2. Still Life: Vase with Twelve Sunflowers - Oil on canvas, 91.0 x 72.0 cm, Arles: August, 1888. In February 1888 van Gogh 
settled at Arles, where he painted more than 200 canvases in 15 months. During this time he sold no pictures, was in 
poverty, and suffered recurrent nervous crisis with hallucinations and depression. He became enthusiastic for the 
idea of founding an artists' co-operative at Arles and towards the end of the year he was joined by Gauguin. 

3. Vincent's Room, Arles 1888; Vincent Van Gogh Foundation, Amsterdam - “When the Amsterdam painting is viewed 
at about arm’s length, or at the distance at which the artist would have been working at his easel, one receives 
an overwhelming impression of realism. One must, however, look at the full-sized painting, not a smaller reproduction. 
An analysis of the actual forms as represented in pictorial space by van Gogh reveals strange incongruities vis-a-vis 
Euclidean anticipations. A tracing of the perspective lines in the painting shows that he maintained neither the fixed 
viewpoint nor the fixed eye-level necessary for a conventional representation of Euclidean space; even single objects 
have multiple convergence points.” 


4. The Starry Night - Saint Rémy, June 1889. Oil on canvas, 29 x 36 1/4" (73.7 x 92.1 cm). 
Acquired through the Lillie P. Bliss Bequest, Museum of Modern Art, New York. "This morning I saw the country 
from my window a long time before sunrise," the artist wrote to his brother Theo, "with nothing but the morning 
star, which looked very big." Rooted in imagination and memory, The Starry Night embodies an inner, subjective 
expression of van Gogh's response to nature. In thick sweeping brushstrokes, a flamelike cypress unites the churning 
sky and the quiet village below. The village was partly invented, and the church spire evokes van Gogh's native land, 
the Netherlands.

5. Fishing Boats on the Beach of Saintes-Maries - oil on canvas (25-1/2x32 inches) that is housed in the Van Gogh 
Museum of Amsterdam. There is a high level of control in van Gogh's composition, with its nearly even division of 
land and sky and the boats positioned to break through the division and unite the separate zones. Even the color is 
controlled, and individual objects are bound within black contour lines.

6. Almond Branches in Bloom, San Remy, c.1890

7. Starry Night over the Rhone, c. 1888

8. Houses at Auvers, c.1890

9. Wheatfield with Cypresses, c. 1889

10. Irises, Saint-Remy, c.1889

 
 
