Edvard Munch

Birth Year : 1863 Death Year : 1944 Country : Norway 
 
In 1879 Munch enrolled in a technical college to study engineering, where he excelled in physics, chemistry, 
and math. He learned scaled and perspective drawing, but frequent illnesses interrupted his studies. The following 
year, much to his father’s disappointment, Munch left the college determined to become a painter. His father viewed 
art as an “unholy trade”, and his neighbors reacted bitterly and sent him anonymous letters.In contrast to his father’s 
rabid pietism, Munch adopted an undogmatic stance toward art, writing in his diary his simple goal: “in my art I attempt 
to explain life and its meaning to myself.”


In 1881, Munch enrolled at the Royal School of Art and Design of Kristiania, founded by his forefather Jacob Munch. 
His teachers were sculptor Julius Middelthun and naturalistic painter Christian Krohg.That year Munch demonstrated his 
quick absorption of his figure training at the Academy in his first portraits, including one of his father and his first 
self-portrait. In 1883, Munch took part in his first public exhibition and shared a studio with other students.His 
full-length portrait of Karl Jensen-Hjell, a notorious bohemian-about-town, earned a critic’s dismissive response: 
“It is impressionism carried to the extreme. It is a travesty of art.”Munch’s nude paintings from this period survive 
only in sketches, except for Standing Nude (1887), perhaps confiscated by his father. 


During these early years in his career, Munch experimented with many styles, including Naturalism and Impressionism. 
Some early works are reminiscent of Manet. Many of these attempts brought him unfavorable criticism from the press and 
garnered him constant rebukes by his father, who nonetheless provided him with small sums for living expenses.At one point, 
however, Munch’s father, perhaps swayed by the negative opinion of Munch’s cousin Edvard Diriks (an established, 
traditional painter), destroyed at least one painting (likely a nude) and refused to advance any more money for art supplies.
 
Other Links related to this Artist:

List of Major Works of Edvard Munch -- 
http://www.ibiblio.org/wm/paint/auth/munch/ 

Edvard Munch Biography - 
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Edvard_Munch 

Painting Gallery - 
http://www.edvard-munch.com/gallery/index.htm 

Major Works:

1. The Scream - 1893 - Details coming soon

2. By the Shore - 1901 - Details coming soon

3. Red and White - 1894 - Details coming soon

4. Lady from the Sea - 1896 - Details coming soon

5. The Dance of Life - 1899 - 1900 - Details coming soon

6. Death in the Sickroom - 1895

7. Vampire - 1893 - 1894

8. Ashes - 1894

9. The Sick Child - 1907

10. Madonna - 1894 - 1895
 
